>> Bianca Gandolfo: So, I know this course
isn't about functional programming, but
I thought I should say a few words about
it just because of the name of the course.
So, functional programming
is a programming style
that is really hip right now, yeah?
Do you guys know?
It's the cool thing.
It was very hip for a while, but
it's becoming more and more hip, and
I guess maybe before was more hipster and
now it's becoming more hip right?
It's integrated into more front and
frame works and things like that and
it's become an expectation that you
can read functional style code and
use functional utility
methods in your code.
And they come for
free with JavaScript, right?
You have a lot of array methods
that are functional leaning.
So what is functional programming about?
It's about breaking up your
code into verbs, really, right?
They say functional
programming is about verbs,
object oriented programming
is about the nouns, right?
It's a lot easier for you to think about
software in terms of objects just because,
as humans, that's kind of where we
live in the physical world, right?
This is a podium, I have my laptop, right.
We think in terms of nouns
where as functional programming
you're thinking in terms of the actions.
So if we were going to build a house,
in object oriented programming,
we would talk about the walls,
and doors, and the windows,
and in functional programming,
we talk about opening and
closing and we would apply it
to the material of the house.
Or we would talk about, what is another
action that you can do in a house?
Turning something on or turning
something off, so we're thinking and
designing our software
around these concepts.
And so we use a lot of functions,
hence the name functional programming.
And we are passing functions to functions,
returning functions from functions,
doing things with the arguments and
the parameters.
Yeah, so it's a style.
This is not about functional
reactive programming.
Functional reactive programming is
a functional style with streams,
observable streams.
Have you guys seen, or
heard of observable streams?
So that's the other really
cool thing these days.
And I wish I had time to teach it, cuz
it is really cool, but it is what it is.
>> Speaker 2: We had two courses on that.
>> Bianca Gandolfo: What's that?
>> Speaker 2: Observables.
>> Bianca Gandolfo: Good.
>> Speaker 2: So,
we have asynchronous programming
with JavaScript with Jaffer Hussein.
>> Bianca Gandolfo: Cool
>> Speaker 2: And that's a two-day course
and then we also have an advanced one.
>> Bianca Gandolfo: Awesome, perfect, yeah
>> Speaker 2: So
that's all about observables, and rx,
and operators, and all that stuff.
>> Bianca Gandolfo: Yeah, so
that's beyond the scope of this.
Is it a two day course only on observable
streams or just reactive in general?
>> Speaker 2: Well it's kind of
mostly reactive programming,
like taking a-
>> Bianca Gandolfo: Yeah,
I guess it has to be.
>> Speaker 2: A data model,
array, whatever.
>> Bianca Gandolfo: Yeah, okay.
>> Speaker 2: Converting it to
observable and interacting with streams.
>> Bianca Gandolfo: Got it, cool.
So we're not gonna be talking about rs,
JS or anything like that.
The things that we're gonna learn
are gonna be more on the line of Lodash,
Underscore, Ramda, things like that.
Have you guys heard of
any of these libraries?
Who's heard of Underscore?
Raise it high.
Who's heard of Lodash?
Awesome, who's heard of Ramda?
Okay, so Ramda is a little more,
so Lodash and
Underscore are utility libraries that give
you fun little functions that help you
really transform data, and
things like that, loop filter, etc.
And Ramda is kind of a more
hardcore version of that.
So, we'll look more into it in a bit.
We're not really gonna talk any more about
functional programming as a style, so
if you have any burning questions,
now it's the time.
I'm not a hardcore functional programmer,
I only teach this class and
this style because I've seen and
I believe that it really helps
you become a stronger programmer.
So I don't have strong
opinions about architecting in
a functional style or some people-
>> Speaker 3: Could you just
give some benefits that you see of
functional programming as opposed to OOP?
>> Bianca Gandolfo: Yeah, sure.
So, I think that one of of the core
tenets of functional programming
is making pure functions that
don't have side effects and
in doing that your code
is a lot easier to test.
And it's a lot easier to trust.
And so
that's a benefit over object oriented.
However, the thing about functional
programming is that if you're doing web,
you have to have side effects, right?
DOM manipulation, all this stuff,
are side effects.
A pure function as a input and an output.
It can't do anything and
effect any other data outside of
the scope of that function, right?
Which makes it easy to test and
that's great but in the real world,
especially in what we do, it's not always,
you can't do a purely functional.
And also some people get too crazy.
I don't know if anyone has seen a very
very hardcore functional programmer's
code-base.
Has anyone seen that?
It can be really scary.
>> Speaker 2: Especially, yeah,
when they're using bifunctor map.
It's one thing to just use map,
but it's like, okay,
let's swap the arguments, plus-
>> Bianca Gandolfo: Yeah, it gets-
>> Speaker 2: Wrap it in a functor, and
then all that's created, so.
>> Bianca Gandolfo: Yeah,
it gets super crazy.
We're not going there.
And I don't think that that's even-
>> Speaker 2: Does it always sacrifice
readability?
>> Bianca Gandolfo: No,
it doesn't have to, it doesn't have to.
>> Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the whole thing
around Cal Simpson's functional light
course.
>> Bianca Gandolfo: Mm-hm.
>> Speaker 2: He has a course on there,
which he's trying to bridge the gap
between sort of the basic functional
concepts and applicable, readable code.
A functional can actually
make your code more
readable if you use it
without going to the extremes
of crazy monoid structures and
all that stuff.
But the basics of functional can
clean up your code drastically, and
make it way more readable.
>> Bianca Gandolfo: Yeah, and
it can help you prevent errors and
stuff as well,
off by one errors with loops.
And we'll talk a little bit about that,
each, and map, and
things like that will help you
prevent those kinds of errors.
But we're not gonna talk about monads,
or monoids, or functors, or
anything super academic.
My style is we're gonna keep it practical,
things that you actually
need to know to understand
the fundamentals.
And then grow into something like the next
functional programing
course that you take.
Whether it's Cal Simpson's one,
which I think, it's not a big
jump from this course, right?
>> Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean,
he does get pretty deep.
It's a deep course but
it starts very basic.
>> Bianca Gandolfo: It's not as
hard as Dr. Bullion's though.
>> Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, if you go to
Hardcore Functional Programming,
>> Bianca Gandolfo: Yeah,
it's called
Hardcore Functional Programming, so.
>> Speaker 2: Yeah, it's more like
taking and turning JMA into JavaScript.
>> Bianca Gandolfo: Yeah, so
we won't be getting into that, but
if you're interested in that and
you've tried it, and you're like, I have
no idea, this is a good place to start.